=> contrib.gmi contrib
=> /quickstart.gmi Quickstart
=> /gmid.1.txt docs

# gmid

> A Gemini server

## Features

* sandboxed by default on OpenBSD, FreeBSD and Linux
* able to reload the configuration on-the-fly without loosing connections
* punycode and IRI support
* reverse proxying
* CGI and FastCGI support
* virtual hosts and per-location rules
* low memory footprint
* event-based asynchronous I/O model
* rich configuration file

=> gmid.1.txt Read the manpage.

## Install

Some distros provide a package — thanks to the maintainers!

=> https://repology.org/project/gmid/versions	[https] Repology: packaging status for gmid

Source code and precompiled binaries for linux are available:

=> https://github.com/omar-polo/gmid/releases/download/1.7.5/gmid-1.7.5.tar.gz	gmid-1.7.5.tar.gz

=> https://git.omarpolo.com/gmid/		git repository
=> gemini://git.omarpolo.com/gmid.git/		git repository via Gemini
=> https://github.com/omar-polo/gmid		GitHub mirror

=> https://github.com/omar-polo/gmid/releases/download/1.7.5/gmid.linux.aarch64		gmid.linux.aarch64
=> https://github.com/omar-polo/gmid/releases/download/1.7.5/gmid.linux.amd64		gmid.linux.amd64

When in doubt, compile from source: it’s easy and takes less than a minute on a raspberry pi 3.  The dependencies are:

* libevent
* OpenSSL/LibreSSL
* libtls (from either LibreSSL or LibreTLS)
* yacc or GNU bison

Once all the dependencies are installed, building is as easy as:

```Example of how to compile from source
$ curl -LO https://github.com/omar-polo/gmid/releases/download/1.7.5/gmid-1.7.5.tar.gz
$ tar xzvf gmid-1.7.5.tar.gz
$ cd gmid-1.7.5
$ ./configure
$ make
$ sudo make install # eventually
```

A SHA256 file is available.  However, that only checks for accidental corruption: you can use signify (SHA256.sig and the public key gmid-1.7.pub) or GPG.  The hash of the signify public key is also included in the SHA256 file and thus signed with my GPG.  The signify public key for the next release ‘gmid-1.8.pub’ is also included.

=> https://github.com/omar-polo/gmid/releases/download/1.7.5/SHA256	SHA256
=> https://github.com/omar-polo/gmid/releases/download/1.7.5/SHA256	SHA256.gpg
=> https://github.com/omar-polo/gmid/releases/download/1.7.5/SHA256.sig	SHA256.sig

To verify the signatures with signify(1)

```Example of how to verify the signature with signify
$ signify -C -p gmid-1.7.pub -x SHA256.sig
Signature Verified
gmid-1.7.pub: OK
gmid-1.7.5.tar.gz: OK
gmid-1.8.pub: OK
gmid.linux.aarch64: OK
gmid.linux.amd64: OK
```

## Change log for the last versions

1.7.5 “Space-dye Vest” fifth bugfix release — Released October 15, 2021

This version includes the following bugfix

* don’t die when a connection is closed before being accepted by gmid (i.e. handle ‘ECONNRESET’)




1.7.4 “Space-dye Vest” fourth bugfix release — Released September 24, 2021

This version includes the following bugfix:

* fix a possible out-of-bound access when handling a request for a non-existent file in the root directory of a vhost that's matched by the cgi option

and the relative regression test.




1.7.3 “Space-dye Vest” third bugfix release — Released September 19, 2021

### Improvements

* follows symlinks
* improved documentation and added key generation example (thanks! Anna)

### Bugfix

* fix syslog logging on FreeBSD.  Reported by Karl Jeacle, thanks!
* don't crash if ``-c'' is missing in configtest mode (-n).  Reported by heph, thanks!
* allow fstat64 on linux (needed by glibc on aarch64).  Reported by pine, thanks!




1.7.2 “Space-dye Vest” second bugfix release — Released July 19, 2021

This version incudes the following bugfix:

* an un-initialized field in the configless code path leads to a crash on the first request.

and the relative regression test.



1.7.1 “Space-dye Vest” bugfix release — Released July 11, 2021

This version includes two bugfixes:
* use ${MAKE} to recursively call make.
* fix the misleading example in the manpage: macros may not be reserved words



1.7 “Space-dye Vest” — Released July 10, 2021

Starting from this version gmid doesn't depend on lex anymore, but yacc is still needed.

### New features

* initial fastcgi support!  (it's still young!)
* added user-defined macros, either via ‘-Dname=val’ or directly in the configuration file.
* new ‘include’ keyword to load additional configuration files.
* new ‘env’ rule to define environment vars for CGI scripts.
* new ‘alias’ rule to define hostname aliases for a server.
* allow ‘root’ to be specified per-location block.
* pidfile support with the new ‘-P’ cli flag.
* define ‘TLS_VERSION’, ‘TLS_CIPHER’ and ‘TLS_CIPHER_STRENGTH’ for CGI scripts.

### Improvements

* remove limits on the number of virtual hosts and location blocks that can be defined.
* print the datetime when logging to stderr.
* use ‘text/x-patch’ for ‘.patch’ and ‘.diff’ files.
* sort the auto index alphabetically.
* various improvements to the log management.
* drop the dependency on lex.
* added ‘--help’ as synonym of ‘-h’ and ‘-V’/‘--version‘ to print the version.
* c-like handling of strings in the configuration file: when two or more strings are next to each-others, are automatically joined into a single string.  This is particularly useful with $-macros.

### Bug fixes

* correctly handle CGI scripts that replies with the maxium header length allowed.
* fixed the static target.
* fixed recursive mkdirs for configless mode (i.e. create ‘~/.local/share/gmid’)
* logs sent to syslog now have proper priority (before every message ended up as LOG_CRIT).  Found by Anna “CyberTailor”, thanks!
* ensure ‘%p’ (path) is always absolute in ‘block return’ rules.
* fix automatic certificate generation, it caused problems on some adroid devices.  Found by Gnuserland, thanks!
* document the ‘log’ rule.
* the seccomp filter was reworked and now it's known to work properly on a vast range of architectures (to be more specific: all the architectures supported by alpine linux), see github issue #4.  Prompted and tested by @begss, thanks!
* various improvements to the configure script, notified and fixed by Anna “CyberTailor”, thanks!
* added a timeout to the regression tests.

### Breaking changes

* if duplicate rules are found in the configuration file, an error is now raised instead of silently using only the last value.
* (sort of) ‘gg’ moved to ‘regress’ as it's only used in the regression suite.
* (notice) the “mime "mime-type" "extension"” rule was deprecated and replaced by the new “map "mime-type" to-ext "extension"”.  The ‘mime’ rule will be removed in a future version because its syntax is incompatible with the new string auto-concat mechanism.
